Live page is at: http://needtoknow.nas.edu/energy/energy-sources/renewable-sources/solar/

The National Academies
What You Need To Know About Energy

How We Use Energy
Our Energy Sources
The Cost of Energy
Energy Efficiency
Home & Work
Transportation
Industry

Our Energy Sources
Renewable Sources
Geothermal
Wind
Solar
Hydroelectric
Biomass

Graphical description: solar panels at sunset
VisionsofAmerica/Joe Sohm

Solar
Sunlight is Earth’s most abundant energy source and is delivered everywhere free of charge. Yet direct use of solar energy—that is, harnessing light’s energy content immediately rather than indirectly in fossil fuels or wind power—makes only a small contribution to humanity’s energy supply. In 2008, about 0.1% of the total energy supply in the United States came from solar sources. In theory, it could be much more. In practice, it will require considerable scientific and engineering progress in the two ways of converting the energy of sunlight into usable forms.

Photovoltaic systems are routinely employed to power a host of devices—from orbiting satellites to pocket calculators—and many companies make roof-sized units for homes and office buildings.

Photovoltaic (PV) systems exploit the photoelectric effect discovered more than a century ago. In certain materials, the energy of incoming light kicks electrons into motion, creating a current. Sheets of these materials are routinely employed to power a host of devices—from orbiting satellites to pocket calculators—and many companies make roof-sized units for homes and office buildings.

At the present time, however, the best commercial PV systems produce electricity at five to six times the cost of other generation methods, though if a system is installed at its point of use, which is often the case, its price may compete successfully at the retail level. PV is an intermittent source, meaning that it’s only available when the Sun is shining. Furthermore, unless PV energy is consumed immediately, it must be stored in batteries or by some other method. Adequate and cost-effective storage solutions await development. One factor favoring PV systems is that they produce maximum power close to the time of peak loads, which are driven by air-conditioning. Peak power is much more expensive than average power. With the advent of time-of-day pricing for power, PV power will grow more economical.

Sunlight can also be focused and concentrated by mirrors and the resulting energy employed to heat liquids that drive turbines to create electricity—a technique called solar thermal generation. Existing systems produce electricity at about twice the cost of fossil-fuel sources. Engineering advances will reduce the cost, but solar thermal generation is unlikely to be feasible outside regions such as the southwestern United States that receive substantial sunlight over long time periods.

Despite the challenges, the idea of drawing our energy from a source that is renewable and that does not emit greenhouse gases has powerful appeal.

Learn more about these related topics:
Sustainability
The Sun

Print
E-mail
Share

Energy Videos
Video thumbnail 5:42
America's Energy Future
View YouTube Channel

Energy Hands-on
Understanding Efficiency
Learn the significance of energy efficiency
Our Energy System
A visualization of all our energy sources

What do you know about energy?
Which energy sources together account for 84% of the energy used in the United States?
Nuclear, wind, and solar
Petroleum, natural gas, and coal
Coal and renewable energy
Correct!
Fossil fuels (petroleum, natural gas, and coal) account for 84% of the energy used in the United States.
Take the full quiz

Energy Defined
Ethanol (or Ethyl Alcohol)
Best known as the type of alcohol found in alcoholic beverages, it is produced in large quantities through the fermentation of the sugars and carbohydrates in agricultural crops and blended with gasoline as an alternative to conventional oil-based fuels for motor vehicles.
View our full glossary

National Academies Press
Search the National Academies Press website by selecting one of these related terms.
transportation
residential
industrial
economic sector
efficiency

Uses
Home & Work
Transportation
Industry

Sources
The Sun
Electricity
Fossil Fuels
Nuclear
Renewable Sources
Emerging Technologies

Costs
Environmental Impact
Security
Sustainability

Efficiency
Getting More for Less
CAFE Standards
Industrial Efficiency
Refrigeration
Lighting
Heating & Cooling

The National Academies.
Advisers to the Nation on Science, Engineering, and Medicine.
National Academy of Sciences
National Academy of Engineering
Institute of Medicine
National Research Council
 
Homepage
About this Website
Source Library
Glossary
Contact Us

Copyright © 2014, The National Academy of Sciences. Terms of Use and Privacy Statement
